Rewrite `attr()` to match the newest version of the spec (#37574)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/attr/index.md

{{EmbedInteractiveExample("pages/tabbed/function-attr.html", "tabbed-shorter")}}

## Syntax

```css
/* Basic usage */
attr(data-count)
attr(href)

/* With type */
attr(data-width px)
attr(data-size rem)
attr(data-name string)
attr(id type(<custom-ident>))
attr(data-count type(<number>))
attr(data-size type(<length> | <percentage>))

/* With fallback */
attr(data-count type(<number>), 0)
attr(data-width px, inherit)
attr(data-something, "default")
```

### Parameters

The `attr()` function's syntax is as follows:

```plain
attr(<attr-name> <attr-type>? , <fallback-value>?)
```

The parameters are:

- `<attr-name>`
  - : The attribute name whose value should be retrieved from the selected HTML element(s).
- `<attr-type>`

  - : Specifies how the attribute value is parsed into a CSS value. This can be the `string` keyword, a `type()` function, a CSS dimension unit. When omitted, it defaults to `string`.

    - The `string` keyword, which parses the value into a CSS string.

      ```css
      attr(data-name string, "stranger")
      ```

>     - The `type()` function, which takes a `<syntax>` as its argument that specifies what [data type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Types) to parse the value into. The `<syntax>` can be {{CSSxRef("&lt;angle&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;color&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;custom-ident&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;image&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;integer&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;length&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;length-percentage&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;number&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;percentage&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;resolution&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;string&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;time&gt;")}}, and {{CSSxRef("&lt;transform-function&gt;")}}, or a combination thereof.

Author: Added a small sentence that shows how to combine mutliple types + I split off the example from the code block.

      ```css
      attr(id type(<custom-ident>), none)
      attr(data-count type(<number>), 0)
      attr(data-size type(<length> | <percentage>), 0px)
      ```

      Excluded from this list is {{CSSxRef("&lt;url&gt;")}} for [security reasons](#limitations_and_security).

    - An `<attr-unit>`, which is an identifier that matches the `%` character or a [CSS distance unit](/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Values_and_Units#distance_units) such as `px`, `rem`, `deg`, `s`, …

      ```css
      attr(data-size rem)
      attr(data-width px, inherit)
      attr(data-rotation deg)
      ```

- `<fallback-value>`
  - : The value to be used if the specified attribute is missing or contains an invalid value.

> ### Return value

Reviewer: The structure is much better now, but the "Return value" section now feels a bit incomplete. I think you need to start it with a one-sentence summary of what the return value is in general, followed by a more detailed description of how this value differs depending on the arguments you specify.

You've mostly got this, but you also need to mention the string keyword and the `type()` function.

Author: Added.

attr(title);

/* With type */
attr(id type(<custom-ident>));
attr(data-count type(<number>));
attr(data-width px);
attr(data-name string);

/* With fallback */
attr(data-count type(<number>), 0);
attr(data-width px, inherit);
attr(data-something, "default");
```

### Parameters

The `attr()` function's syntax is as follows:

```plain

> attr(<attr-name> <attr-type>? , <declaration-value>?)

Author: I was following https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/calc-size here as a guideline. Will keep only the first line.

<attr-name> = [ <ident-token>? '|' ]? <ident-token>
<attr-type> = type( <syntax> ) | string | <attr-unit>
```

The parameters are:

- `<attr-name>`
  - : The name of an attribute on the HTML element referenced in the CSS.
- `<attr-type>`
  - : Specifies how the attribute value is parsed into a CSS value.

> - `<declaration-value>`

Author: Adjusted.

>   - : The value to be used if the associated attribute is missing or contains an invalid value. If not set, CSS will default to an empty string when no `<attr-type>` is set or the guaranteed-invalid value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : The value to be used if the specified attribute is missing or contains an invalid value. If not set, CSS will default to an empty string when no `<attr-type>` is set or the guaranteed-invalid value.
```

Reviewer: My suggestion only covers the first sentence.

I'd remove the second sentence and instead include this information in the "Return value" section, as it is really a description of what the return value ends up as, if the fallback is or isn't included and the `<attr-type>` is or isn't included, right? But I also think it needs work. For example, it is no use saying "guaranteed-invalid value", as most readers won't know what that means. Either add more description to this page, or add an MDN glossary entry for it and link to it?

Author: Added a glossary entry.

> ### Return Value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Return value
```

> By default attributes will be parsed into a CSS string but you can change that with the optional `<attr-type>`. You can set `<attr-type>` to one of these three:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default attributes will be parsed into a CSS string but you can change that with the optional `<attr-type>`. You can set `<attr-type>` to one of the following:
```

> - The `string` keyword which parses the value into a CSS string. This has the same outcome as omitting the `<attr-type>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `string` keyword, which parses the value into a CSS string. This has the same outcome as omitting the `<attr-type>`.
```

Reviewer: But, as I said above, I'd include the detailed information on `<attr-type>` values in a "Description" section. This section should just list the possible Return value types, and say briefly how they are achieved.

> - The `type()` function which needs a `<syntax>` to know what [data type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Types) to parse the value into. Possible `<syntax>`es include {{CSSxRef("&lt;angle&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;color&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;custom-ident&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;image&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;integer&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;length&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;length-percentage&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;number&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;percentage&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;resolution&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;string&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;time&gt;")}}, and {{CSSxRef("&lt;transform-function&gt;")}}–or a combination thereof. Excluded from this list is {{CSSxRef("&lt;url&gt;")}} for [security reasons](#limitations_and_security)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `type()` function, which takes a `<syntax>` as its argument that specifies what [data type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Types) to parse the value into. The `<syntax>` can be {{CSSxRef("&lt;angle&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;color&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;custom-ident&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;image&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;integer&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;length&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;length-percentage&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;number&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;percentage&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;resolution&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;string&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("&lt;time&gt;")}}, and {{CSSxRef("&lt;transform-function&gt;")}}, or a combination thereof. Excluded from this list is {{CSSxRef("&lt;url&gt;")}} for [security reasons](#limitations_and_security)
```

Reviewer: This description could really do with some example snippets to give the reader an idea of what is acceptable, especially for combinations of multiple syntaxes. Which combinations are valid?

Author: Added examples

> - A `<attr-unit>` which is any identifier that matches a [CSS distance unit](/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Values_and_Units#distance_units), such as `px`, or the `%` character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An `<attr-unit>`, which is an identifier that matches a [CSS distance unit](/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Values_and_Units#distance_units) such as `px` or `rem`, or the `%` character.
```

Reviewer: It can also be other unit types, such as resolution, time, angle, etc., can't it?

If the Chrome 133 release only supports a subset of the specified allowed units, then the BCD should specify `"partial_implementation": true`, and include a note to specify what is currently supported.

Author: > It can also be other unit types, such as resolution, time, angle, etc., can't it?

Correct. Added more examples.

}

.background[data-background] {
  background-color: attr(data-background type(<color>), red);
}
```

#### Result

> // TODO: This live Example needs to be adjusted

Reviewer: What is the issue with this live example? I'm afraid I can't look at it because the live examples seem to be b0rked in the live preview pages, but I'm assuming you've tested it locally.

Author: It uses an older syntax. I am not sure where I can find this live example so that I can edit it.

Author: Perfect, thanks!

{{EmbedLiveSample("color_value", "100%", 50)}}

> ### using fallback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using a fallback value
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("using_fallback", "100%", 90)}}

> ### `<custom-ident>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Parsing `attr()` values as `<custom-ident>`s
```

> In this example the values for the {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} property are dereived from the `id` attribute of the element. The attribute gets parsed into a {{CSSxRef("&lt;custom-ident&gt;")}} which is what {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the values for the {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} property are derived from the `id` attribute of the element. The attribute gets parsed into a {{CSSxRef("&lt;custom-ident&gt;")}}, which is what {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} needs.
```

The resulting values for {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} are `card-1`, `card-2`, `card-3`, etc.

#### HTML

```html
<div class="cards">
  <div class="card" id="card-1"></div>
  <div class="card" id="card-2"></div>
  <div class="card" id="card-3"></div>
  <div class="card" id="card-4"></div>
</div>
```

#### CSS

```css
.card[id] {
  view-transition-name: attr(id type(<custom-ident>), none);
  view-transition-class: card;
}

> ```

Reviewer: It would be lovely if we could see this expended into a live example.

Author: Added. Also adding the rotation example

> ### dimension unit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using dimension units
```

> In this example the `data-size` attribute gets parsed into a pixel value.

Reviewer: Again, it might be nice to see a slightly more unusual value used, such as `rem` or `vw`. Also, it would be nice to to expand this a bit into a live example. The example in the spec is kinda nice, although it would be better without the custom element names.

Author: Updated the example.

#### HTML

```html
<div data-size="10">test</div>
```

#### CSS

```css
div {
  font-size: attr(data-size px);
}
```

## TODO: Title for this section

> ### Limitations and Security

Reviewer: These H3s should be subsections inside the "Description" section that I mentioned earlier.

> ### Limitations and Security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Limitations and security
```

> The `attr()` function can reference attributes that were never intended by the page to be used for styling, and might contain sensitive information (for example, a security token used by scripts on the page). In general this is fine, but it can become a security threat when used in URLs. Therefore you can't use `attr()` to dynamically construct URLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `attr()` function can reference attributes that were never intended by the page author to be used for styling, and might contain sensitive information (for example, a security token used by scripts on the page). In general, this is fine, but it can become a security threat when used in URLs. You therefore can't use `attr()` to dynamically construct URLs.
```

```html
<!-- This won't work! -->
<span data-icon="https://example.org/icons/question-mark.svg">help</span>
<style>
  span[data-icon] {
    background-image: url(attr(data-icon));
  }
</style>
```

> Values that use get marked as _"`attr()`-tained"_. Using an `attr()`-tainted value as or in a `<url>` makes a declaration become ["invalid at computed value time" or IACVT for short](https://brm.us/iacvt)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`attr()` return values that include URLs get marked as _"`attr()`-tained"_. Using an `attr()`-tainted value as or within a `<url>` makes a declaration become ["invalid at computed value time" or IACVT for short](https://brm.us/iacvt)
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is correct, but something was missing from your original sentence.

### Backwards compatibility

> Generally speaking `attr()` is pretty much backwards compatible because the old way of using it–the one without specifying an `<attr-type>`–behaves the same as before. Having `attr(data-attr)` in your code is the same as writing `attr(data-attr type(<string>))` or the simpler `attr(data-attr string))`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally speaking, the modern `attr()` syntax is backwards-compatible because the old way of using it — without specifying an `<attr-type>` — behaves the same as before. Having `attr(data-attr)` in your code is the same as writing `attr(data-attr type(<string>))` or the simpler `attr(data-attr string))`.
```

> However, there are two edge cases where advanced `attr()` behaves differently from the old one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there are two edge cases where the modern `attr()` syntax behaves differently from the old syntax.
```

> In the following snippet, browsers with no advanced `attr()` support will discard the second declaration because it cannot parse it. Therefore the result in those browsers is `"Hello World"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following snippet, browsers that don't support the modern `attr()` syntax will discard the second declaration because they cannot parse it. The result in those browsers is `"Hello World"`.
```

```html
<div text="Hello"></div>
```

```css
div::before {
  content: attr(text) " World";
}
div::before {
  content: attr(text) 1px;
}
```

> In browsers with advanced `attr()` support the output will be … nothing. Those browsers will successfully parse the second declaration but because it is gibberish content for the `content` property, the declaration becomes ["invalid at computed value time" or IACVT for short](https://brm.us/iacvt).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In browsers with support for the modern syntax, the output will be … nothing. Those browsers will successfully parse the second declaration but, because it is invalid content for the `content` property, the declaration becomes ["invalid at computed value time" or IACVT for short](https://brm.us/iacvt).
```

Reviewer: I'm intrigued by this example. Sure if the second declaration is invalid, the first one is still valid? Or does IACVT still provide a value but then it doesn't work? Might be worth clarifying this a bit.

Author: It’s regular cascade: the last declaration wins but since its value is gibberish the entire declaration becomes IACVT. At that point the earlier declaration from the 1st rule was already discarded. This is clarified in the linked to IACVT article.

To prevent this sort of situation, we suggest to use [feature detection](#feature_detection).

A second edge case is the following:

```html
<div id="parent"><div id="child" data-attr="foo"></div></div>
```

```css
#parent {
  --x: attr(data-attr);
}
#child::before {
  content: var(--x);
}
```

> In browsers with no advanced `attr()` support the text `"foo"` gets displayed. In browsers with `attr()` support there is no output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In browsers without support for the modern syntax, the text `"foo"` gets displayed. In browsers with modern `attr()` support there is no output.
```

> That is because `attr()`–similar to custom properties that use the `var()` function–get substituted at [computed value time](https://brm.us/iacvt/#custom-properties). With the new behavior, `--x` first tries to read the `data-attr` attribute from the `#parent` element, which results in an empty string because there is no such attribute on `#parent`. That empty string then gets inherited onto the `#child` element, resulting in a `content: ;` declaration being set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because `attr()` — similar to custom properties that use the `var()` function — get substituted at [computed value time](https://brm.us/iacvt/#custom-properties). With the modern behavior, `--x` first tries to read the `data-attr` attribute from the `#parent` element, which results in an empty string because there is no such attribute on `#parent`. That empty string then gets inherited by the `#child` element, resulting in a `content: ;` declaration being set.
```

To prevent this sort of situation, make sure you don't pass inherited `attr()` values onto children, unless you explicitly want to.

> ### Feature Detection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Feature detection
```

> We can feature detect support for advanced `attr()` using the {{CSSxRef("@supports")}} at-rule by trying it to assign advanced `attr()` to a (non-custom) CSS property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can feature detect support for modern `attr()` syntax using the {{CSSxRef("@supports")}} at-rule. In the test, try to assign advanced `attr()` to a (non-custom) CSS property.
```

For example:

```css
@supports (x: attr(x type(*))) {

>   /* Browser has advanced attr() support */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /* Browser has modern attr() support */
```

}

@supports not (x: attr(x type(*))) {

>   /* Browser has no advanced attr() support */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /* Browser does not have modern attr() support */
```

}
```

We can perform the same check in JavaScript with [`CSS.supports()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS/supports_static):

```js
if (CSS.supports("x: attr(x type(*))")) {

>   /* Browser has advanced attr() support */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /* Browser has modern attr() support */
```

}

if (!CSS.supports("x: attr(x type(*))")) {

>   /* Browser has no advanced attr() support */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /* Browser does not have modern attr() support */
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("using_fallback", "100%", 90)}}

### Parsing `attr()` values as `<custom-ident>`s

In this example, the values for the {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} property are derived from the `id` attribute of the element. The attribute gets parsed into a {{CSSxRef("&lt;custom-ident&gt;")}}, which is what {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} needs.

The resulting values for {{cssxref("view-transition-name")}} are `card-1`, `card-2`, `card-3`, etc.

#### HTML

```html

> <div class="cards">

Author: .done

    demo won’t do anything.
  </p>
</div>
```

#### CSS

```css hidden
:root {
  view-transition-name: none;
}
::view-transition {
  pointer-events: none;
}

@supports (x: attr(x type(*))) {
  .warning {
    display: none;
  }
}

@layer layout {
  .cards {
    display: flex;
    flex-direction: row;
    gap: 1em;
    padding: 1em;
  }

  .card {
    border-radius: 0.25em;
    width: 20vw;
    max-width: 5em;
    aspect-ratio: 1 / 1.6;
    background: lightgrey;

    display: grid;
    place-content: center;
    font-size: 2em;
  }

  * {
    box-sizing: border-box;
  }

  body {
    min-height: 100svh;
    display: grid;
    place-content: center;
  }

  button {
    justify-self: center;
  }
}

@layer warning {
  .warning {
    padding: 1em;
    border: 1px solid #ccc;
    background: rgba(255 255 205 / 0.8);
    text-align: center;
    order: -1;
    margin: 1em;
  }

  .warning > :first-child {
    margin-top: 0;
  }
  .warning > :last-child {
    margin-bottom: 0;
  }
}
```

```css
.card[id] {
  view-transition-name: attr(id type(<custom-ident>), none);
  view-transition-class: card;
}
```

#### Result

> ```js hidden

Reviewer: I would also show the JavaScript in a "JavaScript" section, an explain what it is doing.

Author: .done

const shuffle = (array) => {
  for (let i = array.length - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
    const j = Math.floor(Math.random() * (i + 1));
    [array[i], array[j]] = [array[j], array[i]];
  }
};
document.querySelector("button").addEventListener("click", (e) => {
  const $cards = Array.from(document.querySelectorAll(".card"));
  shuffle($cards);
  document.startViewTransition(() => {
    $cards.forEach(($card, i) => {
      $card.style.setProperty("order", i);
    });
  });
});
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("parsing_attr_values_as_custom-idents", "100%", 400)}}

> ### Using dimension units

Reviewer: This example doesn't need so much explanation, as it is really obvious what is going on.

Really nice examples BTW!

Reviewer: I would also consider putting the view transitions one at the bottom of the section, as it is by far the most complex example.

Author: .done
